= shm_open_anon

== Overview

This library provides a single C function:

    int shm_open_anon(void);

It returns a file descriptor pointing to a shared memory region. On
failure, `-1` is returned and `errno` is set.

== Details

The region is not bound to any pathname -- it is anonymous like the
ones you get from `mmap()`. But whereas `mmap()` gives you a pointer,
this one gives you a file descriptor, which means you can pass it to
other processes even if they are not direct forks of the process that
made it.

On arrival, the descriptor has the close-on-exec flag set so it
doesn't survive an `exec()` boundary. But you can call `fcntl()` to
unset the `FD_CLOEXEC` flag to make it survive. Then you can freely
pass it to subprocesses that start other executables. Make sure to
place it at a known file descriptor number (usually number `3` and up)
using `dup2()` so the other executable can find it.

You can also use `sendmsg()` with `SCM_RIGHTS` to send a copy of the
file descriptor to another process over a Unix domain socket. That
part of the BSD socket API is even more perplexing than the rest of
it, so there's a convenience wrapper _libancillary_ that offers "fd
passing for humans".

The region's initial size is zero bytes. You need to use `ftruncate()`
to grow it, and then you'll probably want to use `mmap()` to get a
pointer to actually access the memory. `mmap()` needs to know the size
of the region. If you pass the file descriptor to an unrelated
process, that process can use `fstat()` and then look at `st_size` in
the result.

Because the file descriptor is not bound to any file system or shared
memory pathname, you don't need to worry about a memory leak in case
your processes terminate abruptly. There's no need to do special
cleanup -- the operating system removes the shared memory object when
all file descriptors accessing it are closed.

== Implementation details

Read below for the gory details on how ludicrously difficult this was
to get to work portably. The result is delightfully simple and clear,
but when's the last time you came across a list of gotchas like this?
And the POSIX API is "standardized".

== Linux

=== Current method using memfd

This technique is available in Linux kernel version 3.17 and later.

- Use `memfd_create()` -- problem solved.

- `memfd_create()` is a system call that exists since kernel version
  3.17.

- Even if the syscall is in your kernel, your libc does not
  necessarily have a C function (syscall wrapper) for it. GNU libc
  took years to add a wrapper.

- You can get around that by calling the generic syscall wrapper
  `syscall(__NR_memfd_create, ...)` instead. Remember to typecast the
  arguments.

- `__NR_memfd_create` is the Linux syscall number (a small integer).
  Note that syscall numbers may differ by computer architecture. Use
  `#include <linux/unistd.h>` to get the right numbers for your
  architecture.

- Since `\__NR_memfd_create` is a preprocessor definition, you can use
  `#ifdef __NR_memfd_create` to check whether your Linux headers
  define it.

- If the syscall is not implemented in the kernel you are running, you
  get an errno value of `ENOSYS` or `ENOTSUP` (not sure which one).

- http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/memfd_create.2.html

=== Old method using /dev/shm

This technique is not included in the current library since all
currently maintained Linux kernel versions (except 3.16 from 2014)
implement the newer and more robust `memfd` API, but it is still
useful where compatibility with older systems is needed.

- In kernel versions before 3.17, a memory-backed file system was
  mounted into `/dev/shm` or `/run/shm` depending on the distro. (In
  fact, distros still mount such a file system, but it's a bit less
  useful now.)

- You can use perfectly ordinary `open()` and `unlink()` to operate on
  any files there.

- The safest and easiest way create a tempfile there is `mkostemp()`.
  It's in fact easier to use this than to use `shm_open()`.

- To force a file to be opened as a memory-backed tempfile instead of
  a disk file, regardless of which file system its pathname points to,
  you can give `O_TMPFILE` to `open()` since kernel version 3.11. You
  really should use `O_RDWR` along with it. Note also that `O_TMPFILE`
  may not be defined by library headers, but that constant is probably
  architecture independent so you may be able to get away with
  defining it yourself.

- http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/shm_overview.7.html

- https://lwn.net/Articles/619146/ (how `O_TMPFILE` came about)

== FreeBSD

- Use `shm_open(SHM_ANON, O_RDWR, 0)` -- problem solved.

- The constant `SHM_ANON` is defined to be `1` which is an unaligned
  pointer one byte away from the null pointer `0`.

- You must use the `O_RDWR` flag. If you do not, the default is
  `O_RDONLY` (value zero) and that's not allowed for shm objects.

- Permission bits can be zero, at least when subprocesses have the
  same user ID as the parent process that created the fd.

- https://www.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=shm_open

- https://github.com/freebsd/freebsd/search?q=SHM_ANON

== OpenBSD

- `shm_mkstemp()` is the thing to use. You need to `shm_unlink()` the
  path afterwards.

- Pathnames given to `shm_open()` get translated into
  `/tmp/<hash>.shm` where `<hash>` is the SHA-256 hash of the pathname
  you gave. It doesn't matter what slashes, if any, your pathname has.

- `shm_mkstemp()` calls `shm_open()` with `O_RDWR | O_EXCL | O_CREAT`
  in a loop until it succeeds. Your pathname template gets the X's
  filled in as with `mktemp()` and then `shm_open()` applies its
  translation rules to that. So it doesn't much matter what pathname
  you give.

- `shm_unlink()` translates path to shm path and does `unlink()`.

- http://man.openbsd.org/shm_mkstemp.3

- https://github.com/openbsd/src/blob/master/lib/libc/gen/shm_open.c

== NetBSD

- `shm_open()` is the best we can do. You need to `shm_unlink()` the
  path afterwards.

- The pathname given to `shm_open()` must start with a slash. It must
  *not have any other* slashes.

- If the pathname does not start with a slash, or has other slashes,
  you get `EINVAL`.

- Each pathname `/foo` is translated into `/var/shm/.shmobj_foo`.

- `/var/shm` is mounted as a tmpfs filesystem. The shm routines check
  this and if is't not, you get `ENOTSUP`.

- `shm_open()` translates your path to an shm path and then does
  `open()` with `O_CLOEXEC | O_NOFOLLOW`.

- `shm_unlink()` translates your path to an shm path and then does
  `unlink()`.

- http://netbsd.gw.com/cgi-bin/man-cgi?shm_open

- https://github.com/NetBSD/src/blob/trunk/lib/librt/shm.c

== DragonFlyBSD

- `shm_open()` is the best we can do. You need to `shm_unlink()` the
  path afterwards.

- `shm_open()` just does `open()` but also uses `fcntl()` to set the
  undocumented `FPOSIXSHM` flag. It also sets `FD_CLOEXEC`. No
  pathname translation.

- `shm_unlink()` is just an alias for `unlink()`. No pathname
  translation.

- To generate the pathname, I couldn't come up with anything better
  than giving `/tmp/shmXXXXXXX` to `mktemp()`. This causes the
  compiler (more precisely, the linker) to emit a warning because
  `mktemp()` is often used unsafely. We can use it safely by giving
  `O_CREAT | O_EXCL | O_NOFOLLOW` as the `shm_open()` flags.

- https://leaf.dragonflybsd.org/cgi/web-man?command=shm_open&section=3

- https://github.com/DragonFlyBSD/DragonFlyBSD/blob/master/lib/libc/gen/posixshm.c

== MacOS X

- I didn't find anything better than `shm_open()` and `shm_unlink()`
  with POSIX semantics.

== Solaris

- I didn't find anything better than `shm_open()` and `shm_unlink()`
  with POSIX semantics.

- https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E26505_01/html/816-5171/shm-open-3rt.html

- https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E26505_01/html/816-5171/shm-unlink-3rt.html

== Haiku (BeOS)

- I didn't find anything better than `shm_open()` and `shm_unlink()`.

- Translates your pathname so it goes under the `/var/shared_memory`
  directory. Removes any number of leading slashes, then escapes `/`
  by `%s` and `%` by `%%` (these are literal percent signs, not format
  string magic).

- Othersise `shm_open()` and `shm_unlink()` are just `open()` and
  `unlink()`. `shm_open()` opens with `FD_CLOEXEC`.

- Not sure whether or not the original BeOS had these same semantics.

- https://github.com/haiku/haiku/blob/master/src/system/libroot/posix/sys/mman.cpp

== Cygwin

- Probably have to use `shm_open()` and `shm_unlink()`.

- Not sure if clearing the close-on-exec flag and using `dup2()` will
  have the desired effect.

- Translates your pathname by removing at most one slash from the
  beginning. Then puts that name under `/dev/shm/` with no escaping of
  slashes. So it's best to use a name that has only one slash with the
  start; if you use more slashes, those subdirectories may have to
  exist under `/dev/shm`.

- As far as I can tell, `/dev/shm` is an ordinary directory on a
  disk-backed file system, not a special memory-back file system. So
  expect shared memory to be slow, especially on traditional hard
  disks.

- Cygwin also supports System V IPC (`shmget()` et.al.) and it seems
  to be specially implemented by `cygserver` on a better foundation.

- https://github.com/Alexpux/Cygwin/blob/master/newlib/libc/sys/linux/shm_open.c

- http://pipeline.lbl.gov/code/3rd_party/licenses.win/Cygwin/cygserver.README

== Credits

Chris Wellons wrote a thoughtful blog post
(https://nullprogram.com/blog/2016/04/10/[Mapping Multiple Memory
Views in User Space], 2016-04-10) detailing how to use `shm_open()`
without a filename. It also covers Windows API equivalents to
`shm_open()` and `mmap()`, which are `CreateFileMapping()` and
`MapViewOfFile()`.

Maxim Egorushkin suggested using plain `mkostemp("/dev/shm" ,...)`
instead of `shm_open()` on Linux.
